[WAVES]
[HEART BEATING]
[MUSIC - PINK FLOYD, "TIME"]
>> Trees.
Trees are the lifeblood
of our worlds.
Without them, there would
be no life on Earth.
[SIRENS]
Since the beginning of
time, we have been at war
with ourselves and
our environment.
Violence infects our worlds.
It lives in our streets,
our communities,
and now, even in our schools.
Environmental destruction
ravages our planet.
As we continue to destroy
the great fabric of life,
our world is turned upside
down, and in turn, our world
is sick, very sick.
I was committed
to finding peace.
For me, my journey
began with trees.
My name is Greg Reitman.
This is my story.
(SINGING) Ticking
away the moments
that make up a dull day.
Fritter and waste the
hours in an offhand way.
>> I didn't know how to
think as a human being.
I wouldn't know how to
walk as a human being.
I learn all of these
from other human beings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Where is your grace?
Why fight?
>> You have war.
[GUNSHOTS]
[EXPLOSION]
And you have destruction
of the ecosystem.
>> What I think escapes our
attention is that just about
everything we do is violent.
Our agriculture is violent.
What happens to creatures
and the critters
in the soil happens to the
soil itself is violent.
>> It's so obvious that we're
inextricably intertwined with
all of nature.
>> I heard this
word enlightenment,
and I wondered if
it is possible.
Does a human being
have this potential?
>> Why are we so crazy?
Why are we so crazy?
[SIRENS]
>> Why are we so crazy?
Going back to my roots I thought
could provide some insight.
As a kid, I was a
major comic collector.
My first impressions of violence
came from comic book heroes
and villains.
This is my favorite
one, Clark Kent.
Pretty cool.
Oh, here's Batman.
Look at this.
[MUSIC - NEAL HEFTI, "BATMAN
THEME"]
(SINGING) Batman.
>> Superman and Batman
were always my favorites.
But now, I can't help
but notice how violent
all these images are.
Blood and darkness.
Pretty gnarly.
>> One problem is the hero
archetype and lending a kind
of unbalanced image to us
to be very invulnerable,
rather than vulnerable
and sensitive,
to be very powerful and
to be strong and forceful,
and not yielding or
empathic and compassionate.
>> All of our celebrations are
about war or truces or battles
won.
And it always is a division
because someone loses
and someone wins.
>> So it is good versus evil.
Is it fantasy, or is it reality?
I love comics just as
much as everyone else.
But I wonder, does
their pop culture
influence our violent behavior?
>> The World Health Organization
has said that violence is
a preventable disease.
And it is.
We're not born violent.
Our culture teaches
us how to be violent.
>> Here we are at the E3 show.
We got cars, games.
And I'm on a mission.
I'm trying to find out,
is there a peace game?
[MUSIC, THE KILLERS, "HUMAN"]
(SINGING) I did
my best to notice
when the call came
down the line up
to the platform of surrender.
I was broad, but I was kind.
>> Can I get one of these?
>> You certainly can.
>> What do--
>> This is a new one.
This is the 1942 game,
now available on iPhone,
iPad, yeah.
>> And what do you
think of the game?
>> Oh, it's a fun game
because you shoot things.
I always like to shoot things.
>> Oh, you shoot things?
>> Yeah.
I'm not saying I'm pro-war
but I like to shoot things.
>> Look at this, "God of War."
(SINGING) Cut the cord.
Are we human?
Or are we dancers?
[GUNSHOT]
My sign is vital.
My hands are cold.
>> All the signs are pointing
to the fact that we are indeed
a violent society.
But why?
>> Some of the kids know
more about weapons than I do.
>> Could you ever imagine seeing
like a peace, you know, game.
I looked throughout the halls
of the E3 show, and believe me,
there was no peace game.
[RADIO STATIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Mm, Delicious.
Good old bacon,
sausage, and eggs.
Breakfast of champions.
[RADIO STATIC]
>> And this is causing potential
for civilian harm just can't be
justified.
>> This or any other military
operation alone will not
eliminate the threat.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's business.
>> [INAUDIBLE] talk to me.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
You got a huge
force that's moving.
>> There's a market for this.
Can you sell more of these?
Well, you can if
there's conflict.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> If we don't tell the stories
of what war does and how long
it's been doing it, if we don't
talk about what that feels
like, then we carry it forward.
>> I never talked about my
experience living in the first
Gulf War.
>> Early on January 18th, 1991,
the skies of Israel were lit up
by Scud missiles
fired from Iraq,
retaliation for the American
led offensive to oust Saddam
Hussein from Kuwait.
[SIRENS SOUNDING]
>> Within seconds I was
running into a bomb shelter.
I looked over and saw a
mother putting a gas mask
on her child's face.
I asked myself, how does
a mother explain this?
The next day, my mom
called me in tears,
wanting me to come home.
The Gulf War lasted three weeks.
But for me, that one
experience changed my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING) Where do
we go from here?
How do we carry on?
I can't get beyond
the questions.
Clambering for the scraps
in the shatter of us
collapsed that cuts me
with every could-have-been.
>> Good old bonsai.
I didn't even know
it changed my life.
I was a student back
at UMass Amherst.
One morning, I woke in tears.
I didn't understand
why I was crying
or what was happening to me.
I had this crazy idea though.
I was going to save the
world by planting trees.
(SINGING) Time heals everything.
>> I rushed down to the Amherst
library and found the classic
Robert Frost poem
"The Sound of Trees."
It spoke to me.
I produced a fundraiser
leaflet on recycled paper
and named it The Giving
Tree, Rooted in Peace.
I was on a mission
to plant trees.
>> Have a nice day.
>> All right, you too.
Why did I shed those tears?
Why trees?
For me, these emotions took
root when I visited Hiroshima.
>> I visited, like
you, Hiroshima.
It was 1955.
>> Remember what to do, friends.
Now, tell me right
out loud, what
are you supposed to do
when you see the flash?
>> Duck!
And cover!
>> How did Hiroshima disappear?
Why did it disappear?
I'm trying to understand
why humans did this.
And the other question is,
why was Einstein afraid?
>> The only thing
we have to fear is--
>> Increasing the
risk of World War III.
>> In a language that,
in a sense, is new.
That new language is the
language of atomic warfare.
>> For a nuclear disaster,
spread by wind and water
and fear.
>> The peril of nuclear war--
>> Will be used
to defend freedom.
>> And in the nuclear era,
there is no rational alternative
to accords of mutual restraint.
>> The danger is
becoming greater.
>> Our security is based on
being prepared to meet all
threats.
>> No category of nuclear
weapons has received more
attention than those in
our strategic arsenals.
>> We're taking the next crucial
step to lift the dark cloud
of nuclear fear that is hung
over the world for 50 years
now.
>> Should make people nervous
when non-transparent regimes
that announce that they've got
nuclear warheads fire missiles.
>> If we fail to act, we will
invite nuclear arms races
in every region and the prospect
of war on a scale that we can
hardly imagine.
>> Shockwaves from the
underground nuclear test were
felt far and wide.
>> The move further heightens
tensions on the Korean
peninsula.
>> Tensions between the Islamic
republic of Iran and the West
have reached a crescendo.
>> Pakistan has tested its
latest short range missile
capable of carrying
nuclear warheads.
>> Their major focus is on
their mutual neighbor India.
>> People are stunned to realize
we spend $54 billion a year
on nuclear weapons.
That we're planning on
spending $7.3 billion--
I'm sorry, that we're planning
on spending $7.3 trillion
over the next 10 years.
$7.3 trillion?
For what?
To protect who against what?
You know, it's out of whack.
It's out of control.
>> Crazy the world we live in
and how close we are a nuclear
meltdown.
Reflecting at the United
Nations Peace Bell
took me back 20 years.
I was an overseas
student studying abroad
in Sapporo, Japan at
Hokkaido University.
One day, my friends and I decide
to visit the Hiroshima Peace
Memorial.
Tears ran down my friends' faces
as we gazed over the horrific
images.
But for me, there were no tears.
And I wondered, why?
Why didn't I cry?
Why didn't I connect?
>> The first stage usually is
one of a depersonalization,
a shock that happens so that you
feel like this can't really be
happening.
They have really cut
off their emotions.
A lot of emotion can emerge and
a lot of the physical symptoms.
You can get anger.
And the flip side of
that is depression.
Over time, the final stages
have to do with what we call,
basically, resolution
and acceptance.
>> It was all a blur.
I mean, could one traumatic
experience spill over
in one's outer life?
>> Trauma is a common reality.
It's a daily reality.
It happens everyday.
It's very unlikely
that somebody is
going to live a lifetime without
encountering traumatic events
in their lives.
The trauma vortex
is a metaphor that
is very expressive of the
dynamic nature of trauma.
Unhealed trauma, you don't just
get a symptom and you're done.
It keeps augmenting.
It keeps amplifying.
And so from something that just
made a little part of your life
dysfunctional, it
just can spread
to a bigger and bigger part
of your life and, of course,
of the life of the
people around you
and the community that you're
in, et cetera, et cetera.
>> Isn't in trauma something
we've all experienced on one
level or another?
Who could forget
9/11 and the trauma
we all experience as a country.
My brother-in-law and my
family lived through that day.
I thought talking
with him would help.
>> My wife and I, we would
take turns taking our daughter
to daycare, and her preschool
is three blocks just north
of the towers.
On 9/11, it was my turn to stay
at home and wasn't in a hurry
to get to work, so
I decided to cook
a little dinner that
morning, put it in a crockpot
so we come home and have dinner.
And as I was doing that,
I was watching the news
and I saw that the first
tower had been hit.
>> We have word that a plane
had crashed into one tower.
>> Watching it on the news
as I was cooking dinner.
And a horrible thing.
I walked outside.
And as we were standing there,
I was watching, just looking up,
and I saw the second plane come.
>> Americans watched in shock as
a second jetliner flew straight
into the second tower.
>> The silence was
deafening on my street.
It was dead quiet and
nobody knew how to act.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
[SIREN SOUNDING]
[SCREAMING]
As I was looking up, I noticed
the top of the building tilt,
and it just tilted a
bit and just came down.
I can't-- I can't tell
you how tough that was.
Now I see this
big waft of smoke,
and everybody is
turning and running.
And I started running into it.
Excuse me.
I'm so sorry.
I started running into it, and
a cop grabbed me by my arm.
And he grabbed me by my arm.
He said, stop, you
can't go down there.
And I said, my wife and
my daughter are there.
And he said, go, just go.
>> My niece and sister
survived that day.
But until 9/11,
did we ever think
how any of these
global incidents
affect us both
personally and globally?
What does the 9/11
memorial serve for us?
How do we transcend our trauma?
Where do we go from here?
I needed some
inspiration, some hope.
>> (SINGING) If I had a hammer,
I'd hammer in the morning,
I'd hammer in the evening--
>> As fate would have it, I met
the legendary folk singer Pete
Seeger at the United Nations.
[MUSIC - PETE SEEGER, "IF I HAD
A HAMMER"]
>> (SINGING) I'd
hammer out danger.
>> Pete Seeger is one of the
greatest icons of the peace
and social justice movement.
He was a true patriot
serving in World War II.
Never stopped
loving his country,
even after being blacklisted
during the McCarthy era
by the US government.
>> Mr. Seeger, you specifically
declined the protection
of the Fifth Amendment
and are refusing to answer
the committee's questions.
Can you tell us why?
>> (SINGING) I'd ring
it in the evening.
>> For 70 years, he was on the
frontlines fighting for justice
and human rights.
>> (SINGING) Hey, [INAUDIBLE].
Ring out love.
I'd ring out love.
>> After the UN ceremony--
[BELL RINGS]
--Pete invited me to join him
in his hometown of Beacon,
New York, a bit up the
road from West Point,
at the heart of the United
States military academy,
at a place where you can vote
with your car horn for Peace
or for--
well, it's not quite war,
but it's certainly not peace.
How long has this been going on?
>> About five or six years,
between 12 o'clock and 2
o'clock.
Occasionally, I and others have
gone over to shake their hand.
When I go over,
I always say, I'm
glad that I live
in a country where
we can disagree without
trying to shoot each other.
>> Seeger is a communist stooge.
What does that mean?
>> If you don't
know what it means,
you better go back
to school then.
>> You don't want
to talk at all?
>> We support the troops.
They're over there
knocking them.
>> OK.
Well, these guys are obviously--
>> Those guys over there, who
think they're going to bring
peace and prosperity to the
world by blowing bubbles
and doing dances.
Wars have been going
on for 10,000 years.
This is nothing new.
>> The guys are
over there to fight.
We got to support the troops.
>> And so when you
see those guys,
you don't think they
support our troops.
>> I don't care what
they do over there.
[CAR HORNS HONKING]
Do people really know
what they're honking for?
Are they honking for peace?
Are they honking for war?
Or are they just as
confused as I am?
(SINGING) Lordy, don't
leave me all by myself.
>> God, this is so perplexing.
(SINGING) Lordy, don't
leave me all by myself.
Lordy, don't leave
me all by myself.
>> Why is peace so
difficult to achieve?
One of my favorite places to go
as a kid was Corona Park, home
of the 1964 World's Fair
and the symbolic Unisphere.
Are we numbed by our pop
culture to think that violence
doesn't traumatize us?
Are these polarized
forces pulling our world
backwards or forward?
>> The greatest exhibit
of its kind ever staged.
The symbolic Unisphere
was the mecca of millions.
It was a year of change.
A year that called upon man to
face new challenges to shape
the world he dreams about.
>> Does any of this make sense?
Comics, video games.
Is this insane?
Hiroshima, 9/11.
The trauma vortex.
I received the call
from the organizers
of the Universal Peace Day.
They've asked me to plant
a tree at the Church
of St. Paul and St. Andrew.
Maybe it's not that hard.
Maybe peace is as simple as
putting a tree in the ground.
I thought it was
an important event,
so I invited my brother-in-law
and my nephew Gabriel to join.
>> What is peace?
>> It's when-- it's when--
like if there's a lot
of wars or something,
it's when the wars stop.
>> I was so excited to return
to my roots of tree planting.
Turns out, nothing is
as easy as it seems.
You know, that's like cement.
That's not going to grow a root.
It's concrete down there.
Unfortunately, I
don't think this peace
tree is going to take root yet.
>> What do we want?
>> Peace!
When do we want it?
>> Now!
>> Maybe it's time to
take a different approach.
Maybe joining a larger movement,
a peace movement is the answer.
The World March for
Peace and Nonviolence
was celebrating
Gandhi's birthday--
>> Parrots for peace!
>> --by reminding us of
Hiroshima and carrying a torch
around the world.
Why not join them?
What inspired you to come down?
>> Well, I'm a longtime
peace activist, 40 years now,
you know?
>> And did you serve
in the army at all?
>> I was in the
army, the infantry.
I was taught how to
kill when I was 17.
>> And what taught you
to want to make peace?
>> I began to seriously consider
this whole business of just
war.
There is no such
thing as a just war.
>> Are we ready to march?
>> Yeah!
>> We're off.
Me and about 700 people
and three peace parrots.
Not the weather we were
expecting, but we're here
and we're going over the bridge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING) Here we go again.
Here we go again.
>> Is anyone aware about
this world march for peace?
Does any of this really matter?
Does one person or protest as
big as this make a difference?
Is anything in
our world changing
to a more peaceful way?
When we reached the
Manhattan City Hall building,
I was a bit surprised that
there was no welcome committee.
We're informed the mayor
was unable to attend
due to a prior commitment.
And none of US news bureaus
bothered to cover the event.
>> If you want to change the
world, start with yourself.
Be a good example.
Otherwise, you'll end up being
an angry peace activist, which
is a contradiction.
>> Perhaps I'm coming at it
from the wrong direction.
Perhaps I need to
look with them myself.
[MUSIC - THE BEACH BOYS,
"KOKOMO"]
Meeting Deepak Chopra
really opened my eyes
to this idea of inner peace.
He talked about
meditation, consciousness,
and his old friend
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
I went online and
read that Maharishi
had his own university
out in Fairfield, Iowa,
and that The Beach Boys
were coming to town.
>> (SINGING) Off
the Florida Keys--
>> I didn't know who this
Maharishi character was or why
he would have his
own university.
I thought, OK, maybe God
is telling me something.
My girlfriend's from Iowa.
I could use a break.
Maybe it would be a good idea
to go away for the weekend.
So I said, hey Britta, let's
go away and have some fun.
>> (SINGING) Ooh, I want to
take you to Bermuda, Bahama.
Come on, pretty mama.
Key Largo, Montego.
Baby, why don't we go?
>> I met Greg a little
over three years ago.
I was working at a PR firm.
>> I felt like she was looking
at me like she was giving me
the blink-blink.
And I was like,
who is this girl?
I was like, what are you doing?
I'm like, I think she
wants to go out with me.
Maybe that was my arrogant self.
>> I had called him
strictly about work.
And out of nowhere, he took
me off guard and he said,
so are you dating anybody?
>> I think I sort of
threw her a curve ball.
And took her like, you
know, about a minute,
and she's like, yeah, sure.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
Britta and I had a
great time together.
There was a lot of talk
about this guru Maharishi,
transcendental meditation.
I wasn't sure what
it had to do with me.
After The Beach Boys
concert, I had a chance
to meet up with Mike Love.
>> Creativity and more
energy and clarity,
that that sounds like
something everybody could use.
It's kind of like you're
on a spiritual safari.
[MUSIC - MIKE LOVE, "PISCES
BROTHERS"]
We'd been on our
"Surfin Safari," we've
done "Good Vibrations" and
the "Pet Sounds" album and all
these great songs and had
all these great experiences,
but this is a whole different
realm that I ventured into.
>> I was curious at this new
realm and when it all began
for Mike.
>> We were invited to go to
Paris, in December of 1967,
for a Christmas gala that was
going to be televised and sent
out all over Europe.
And during the
rehearsals, we met
Maharishi, who was
ostensibly going
to speak on the program
about world peace.
>> Modern technology says, man
has been using only a small
portion of the mind.
Transcendental
meditation is the way
to enable every man,
to educate every man
to make use of his
full mental potential.
Imagine the development in
all fields of civilization
when every man will be using
his full mental potential.
>> Maharishi said that if
the forest is to be green,
every tree must be green.
(SINGING) Not for fortune.
If there's going
to peace on Earth,
everybody has to feel
that quality of peace.
(SINGING) But for enlightenment
we came to Mahareshi.
And how sublime.
>> I always thought of peace
in the '60s as hippies smoking
marijuana and wearing tie-dyes.
What does the forest
have to do with peace?
Mike mentioned a
spiritual retreat in India
with Maharishi, the Beatles,
and the legendary folk
singer Donovan.
Perhaps Donovan can share
some wisdom about this time.
>> People ask me why and what
led me to India to study with
the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
>> Far from the noise
and pace of city life,
in the cool clear air of
Rishikesh, North India,
we have news reports from the
meditation retreat of Maharishi
Mahesh Yogi, the man who through
transcendental meditation is
currently bringing peace
of mind to the Beatles.
>> When I met The Beatles,
George Harrison and I would
hang out and we were
looking, looking.
What we were searching for
was a super conscious feel.
[MUSIC - DONOVAN, "HURDY GURDY
MAN"]
(SINGING) Thrown like a
star in my vast sleep.
I opened my eyes to
take a peek to find
that I was by the sea
gazing with tranquility.
The human being
lives on three levels
of consciousness, sleeping,
waking, and dreamless sleep.
There is a fourth level, which
once contacted, links you
and unifies you with all
other levels of existence.
It would produce in
one an understanding
of the unity of all.
And we were looking,
who can teach us?
And then, one day, Maharishi
appears in our lives.
>> Just this phenomenon that
we meditate, and we come out,
and we are more general.
[MUSIC - DONOVAN, "HURDY GURDY
MAN"]
(SINGING) Years of sleep,
time demands a turnaround.
And once again,
a truth is found.
Yeah, George.
Then when the hurdy gurdy man,
he comes singing the songs.
Hurdy gurdy, hurdy gurdy,
hurdy gurdy gurdy, he sang.
Once you see yourself and the
world from that fourth level,
everything's different.
>> I was truly inspired by Mike
Love, Donovan, and The Beatles,
but I had a lot of questions.
What is this fourth
level of consciousness?
How is everything different?
Can we really
resolve our conflicts
by expanding our minds?
>> We have to start at our mind.
And in our mind, we
have this crazy idea
that we can kill each other.
>> We've all got this
ancient brain in us--
420 million years old.
It's a reptile brain.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
Reptiles make war.
It's win-lose with a crocodile.
[GROWLING]
We've got to calm the reptile
in us so that that mammal
brain, which is half as old, 210
million years old, can emerge.
Because it's the
mammal brain that
is about compassion, family,
kinship and getting along.
>> I went to visit Dan Siegel,
founder of the Mindsight
Institute, to learn more about
the inner workings of the mind.
>> And what's really amazing
about this brain is the ancient
parts evolved, and
the newer parts grew.
And amazingly, this front
part of the brain right
behind your forehead
is the very part
that we use to reflect
on our own inner life.
It's a natural thing
from our evolution
that with awareness,
we can actually change
the pathway of our society.
When you do meditative practices
like mindfulness meditation,
you actually stimulate the
activity of these areas,
and they begin to grow.
The old thought was that when
you're done with adolescence,
your brain is done growing.
We now know that's
totally not true.
It's constantly
responding to input
that changes its structure.
These areas would
be getting thicker.
Everything is stronger
because it's like a muscle,
that the more you drive energy
and information through them
by the control, the tension,
you do in meditation.
The idea of our
human evolution is
that the area of
the brain where you
have a meeting of
automatic sensations
that are coming with reflective,
thoughtful things you've
learned from the past,
where those two meet
in the layers of the cortex
is actually expanded.
And one of the
implications of that
is that you are
allowed to manipulate
with your own intention
how you live on automatic
or how you awaken your mind.
You shift your state into
a more receptive state
rather than reactive state.
And that's the beginning of
the neural process of love.
>> Expanding the cortex of the
brain to achieve inner peace?
This was fascinating.
I started to examine my
own behaviors, specifically
my reactive side and how
I interact with others.
>> I was living with Greg about
a month, month and a half.
And I started noticing
behaviors that I had never
really seen in Greg before.
He became very erratic.
Our communication
was breaking down.
He was very hard to
communicate with.
He was like a ticking bomb
just waiting to go off.
And I think partially it's
because he was so stressed out
about certain things.
>> I mean, I'm trying
to find the answers
to the world's problems.
And now, I'm supposed
to focus on myself?
>> There were definitely
conversations had of me saying,
Greg, you have a problem.
You can't treat people this way.
And it wasn't even just me.
This was somebody who I thought
was a really good person.
And I was seeing a
very ugly side of him.
>> Yeah, OK, it's part of me.
But, you know, my
life is still working.
Everything's still fine.
You know, I don't
really need to change.
>> If you want to really
create peace in the world,
then you can't be angry, not
even as a peace activist.
The only way you
can change the world
is to be the change yourself.
>> He knew that
he had a problem,
but I don't think he knew
how to fix his problem.
>> Her love just--
just kind of like
opened my heart.
And at a certain point, I
just wanted to push her away.
I didn't want to--
and that was the turning point.
That was the point
where I realized
I can't do this to her.
I can't do this to myself.
It was the moment of truth where
I realized that way is gone.
And I've got to figure it out.
It was time for a change.
I didn't know how or
where to even begin,
but my heart was pointing
me in a new direction.
>> The heart is much
more than just a pump.
As many of the poets
have said for eons,
that the heart appears
to be the main access
point to wisdom,
to the higher self,
to what we call heart intuition.
>> Our paradigm is that the
brain controls the heart,
but we're finding
out that's not true.
In fact, the heart
sends more information
telling the brain what to do
than the brain tells the heart.
With every heartbeat, it's
putting out a very strong
electromagnetic field.
And in fact, the magnetic
field of the heart
is 5,000 times stronger than
the magnetic field of the brain.
These two centers
are designed to do
different things complementary.
And the idea is to get
them to work together.
>> Just put this
on your ear lobe.
>> All right.
>> And just hook it right there.
Each one of these little pulses
or bumps-- that's a heartbeat.
So what the program
is doing is it's
measuring the time
interval between each
of these heartbeats.
And that's going to
plot that up here
in this top graph as your
Heart Rate Variability.
HRV, which stands for
Heart Rate Variability,
is the beat to beat
change in our heart rate.
So this is very different
than heart rate.
So heart rate is just how
many times does the heart
beat in a minute.
But in a healthy
individual, somebody
who's healthy and
resilient, our heart rate
changes with every
single heartbeat.
So if you look at it
over time, the heart's
beating out a message.
The message that the
heart rhythms beat out
is very much related
to our emotions.
>> We all feel, and we all
have the same desires for love
and care and kindness and
frustration, anger, anxiety.
What we call "negative
emotions," "stress emotions,"
really create incoherent,
jagged heart rhythm patterns.
>> Being angry just for a couple
of minutes sets in motion 1,400
different biochemical
changes in our body--
the stress hormones
and all of that.
And some of those hormones
hang around for a long time.
They have what's called
a half-life of 12 hours.
So what you do is you
put your attention
in the center of your
chest and breathe
as though you're breathing right
into the center of your chest.
And we can see
that that's already
starting to shift the pattern.
Then the next step
is, while you're
doing the heart-focused
breathing,
activate the feeling of
care or appreciation.
It could be the feeling you have
for a special place in nature
when you were there.
>> That blue light just went on.
>> That's shifted from low
coherence to medium coherence.
So if you continue practicing
the heart-focused breathing
and trying to activate that
feeling of love or care.
>> Where I said,
Britta, I love you.
That's fascinating.
>> So when you activated
the feeling of love,
you actually shifted into
the high coherent state
for a little bit, there.
>> And when we're feeling
heartfelt qualities of genuine
kindness, love, the heart's
rhythmic pattern becomes smooth
and ordered and sine-wave
like, which is why we call it
a coherent pattern.
[BEEPING]
>> Most of us have gotten kind
of gotten our system into where
incoherence is the familiar.
>> Yeah.
>> So it takes some time to
rewire the neural circuits.
That's exactly what can
happen with some practice.
Good, now you're maintaining
a more coherent state,
and I don't think
you're trying as hard.
>> No, I'm not.
>> Yeah, just kind of being
more in that caring state.
>> Yeah.
The words of Deepak Chopra
kept ringing in my ears--
meditation, mindfulness,
and now heartfulness.
It was time to take my
consciousness to the next level
and to return back to
Maharishi University.
[MUSIC - DAVID GRAY, "DAVEY
JONES' LOCKER"]
(SINGING) At the edge of
consciousness, where the lines,
they start to fade,
where the spirit goes
undressed of all
malice and brocade.
At the edges,
silvery edges, where
the mirror, it
bends and stretches,
past the edges of
this world, where
the waters crash and curl,
take me down, take me down,
Davey Jones, yeah, take me down.
Take me down, Davey Jones.
[CROWD CHEERING]
>> Welcome to all of you
to this Dave Lynch Weekend.
I hope we all have a lot of fun
and a little bit of knowledge.
Maybe in the East they
thought this crazy thing,
but I never heard
about it in the West.
>> That was the insight
that Maharishi brought.
That for a long time,
the understanding
was you had to control the mind.
Oh, the mind is active.
It's the monkey mind.
That's what they say.
You have to stop it.
So somebody has to stop
the waves on the ocean.
The mind is the same way.
The surface of the mind--
active, changing, turbulent.
But deep within the mind,
like deep within the ocean,
deep within the mind,
deep within each one of us
is a silent, settled, unbounded
level of consciousness.
>> This expansion of the
awareness of that unboundedness
which we experience in
meditation into the boundaries
of our behavior, actions,
thinking, understandings,
emotions.
>> I had these anxieties
and worries and doubts.
I had a lot of anger.
Two weeks after I started
meditating, my first wife
comes to me and says,
what is going on?
And I said, what are
you talking about?
She said this anger--
where did it go?
>> We communicate with words.
Our brain cells communicate
with electrical impulses.
And depending on
what you are doing,
the brain frequencies
would be different.
So what happens during
transcendental meditation
practice is the
changes are primarily
in the front of the brain.
And specifically, it's the
front, the center, the back.
The whole brain is
suddenly in sync.
It's communicating.
It's checking in
with each other.
It's really the higher
cognitive centers of the brain.
The longer you've
been meditating,
the longer that will
last in activity,
until there comes a
point where you never
lose the effect of
this ground state
of the mind, this
restfulness, the alertness.
It's there throughout the
day, throughout the night.
>> Are you saying that if people
start during TM that we can
actually remove
our fear anxieties?
>> What we'll be
doing is growing up.
>> It was an inspirational and
life-changing weekend for me
at Maharishi University.
Receiving my mantra and
learning how to meditate
was the beginning of a
new way of life for me.
>> When you experience
the transcendent,
you infuse some of it every
time you experience it.
Negativity starts to lift
away from the human being.
So stress lifts.
Depression, sorrow, anxieties,
worries, fatigue, hate, anger,
fear start to
dissolve, lift away.
When you enliven it,
it moves isotropically
at the speed of light, sees
no barriers, like bright light
of peace, radiating.
(SINGING) Silvery
edges, where the mirror,
it bends and stretches.
Oh, the edges of this world--
>> We-- we transcend.
Our awareness is unbounded.
Our awareness is infinite.
>> Everything changed,
and I realized it was kind
of interesting.
Like, the power was
in me the whole time.
I just didn't know
how to activate it.
>> May everyone be happy.
May everyone be free of disease.
May auspiciousness
be seen everywhere.
May suffering belong to no one.
Peace.
>> It's great to be inspired,
but if you don't put that
inspiration into
action, it'll go away.
>> The fog had finally lifted.
The relationship was healing.
>> Before, when I would
communicate with him,
it was like talking to a wall.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was like all this anger
and all this frustration just
started going away.
>> Part of his transformation
has been keeping up with this
meditation.
[SOFT MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I would just get
up in the morning,
and I would do my mantra.
And I was like,
this really works.
>> So the fact that he's kept
up with it for so long is
unbelievable.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Everything was fine--
I mean, until I got sick.
>> The body's an ecosystem.
And when it's out of balance,
disease occurs, symptoms occur.
And when you create
health in that ecosystem,
disease goes away
as a side effect.
You don't have to actually
treat the disease by itself.
So it's really
important to understand
what are the things that
actually drive imbalances
in the body and what are the
things that create balance.
>> I was very scared.
He kept calling the
doctor that kept
prescribing the same medicine
that obviously was not
helping him.
>> Antibiotics are the single
biggest false turn in medicine.
It gave us the impression that
we could treat all diseases
in that way, by simply
killing this offending agent
with a single drug--
the magic bullet theory.
Unfortunately, that's
not how disease occurs.
It's a complex system
that gets out of balance.
I think we need to figure
out not what's the bug,
but what's the terrain like?
What they call the
biological terrain.
The body is connected.
Everything is connected
to everything else.
Everything is a network.
It's like a web.
Physiology and
biology-- it's connected
to not only what's
going on inside of you
but outside of you.
>> Planet Earth start out
being a real toxic stew.
The process of living
organisms metabolizing
what was on the Earth was one of
sequestering cadmium, mercury,
radioactive materials,
so many things,
and burying them, and burying
them, and burying them.
And now, those human beings are
going back into the lithosphere
and digging it up and spreading
it all around the planet.
[INTENSE MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This global toxicity
is causing this fever,
this symptom.
The Earth is like an organism.
The rivers are
like its arteries,
and the forests
are like its lungs.
Internet is like
its nervous system.
And you and I are like two
red blood cells to your body.
So we are part of this
organism, and we are sick.
>> That since the
turn of last century,
we've had 80,000 new
chemicals introduced
into our environment, most of
which have never been tested
in human beings.
We don't realize that there's
287 known neurotoxic chemicals
in the average umbilical cord
blood of the average newborn.
That means the baby, before it's
even taken its first breath,
has flame retardants,
pesticides, phthalates,
bisphenol A, mercury, lead,
arsenic, all in its blood.
How does that
impact our children?
>> Neurotoxins, even
in unborn babies?
This was disturbing.
After talking with
Dr. Mark Hyman,
he suggested for me to
run some blood tests.
I thought this was
a simple process.
Now, here I am in Lenox,
MA, 14 blood vials later.
>> In your blood tests, you have
a blood sugar that starts out
pretty normal at 96, although
really, that's not normal.
An optimal blood sugar's
probably 70 to 80.
>> Wow.
>> If we did your
waist to hip ratio,
we're going to find your waist
is bigger than your hips,
and you have belly fat.
[OMINOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Yeah.
>> And belly fat
is dangerous fat.
People think that the belly
fat's there just holding up
your pants.
But it's active.
Fat cells in your belly
are hormonally active,
and they're pushing hormones.
And they're pushing inflammatory
molecules into your bloodstream
and creating this whole cascade
that leads to premature aging
and death.
>> When I look at belly fat,
what I think is a stressed-out
person because we accumulate
belly fat for a very particular
reason.
That belly fat
accumulates because it's
a receptor for
steroids of the body.
And the cortisol released,
the stress hormones
released when you are
stressed out, will accumulate.
They get sucked up
in the belly fat.
>> You also have a
few other problems.
You have--
>> I don't like the
word "problems."
How about "symptoms"
or something--
>> Well, you have imbalances
that have to get fixed.
>> OK, "imbalance"
is a better word.
>> Yeah, whatever you eat
is reacting with your immune
system because your
gut's not healthy.
60% of your immune
system is in your gut--
60%-- because it's there to help
fight against foreign invaders,
and there's a lot
of foreign invaders.
There's bacteria,
there's food proteins,
all within a cell away
of your immune systems.
>> Wow.
While I was in Dr.
Mark Hyman's office,
I started to think
about my imbalances
and question whether it was
just food or something else that
was affecting my immune system.
>> This professor at Harvard
and MIT, he was bio engineer,
told me about a study where
they analyzed teeth with mercury
fillings in them.
And they found that
the mercury goes down
through the dentinal tubules
into your bloodstream
as it was vaporizing off
from the top of the tooth.
Ask your dentist why is it safe
to have mercury in your mouth
when when they take it out, they
can't throw it in the garbage
because it's regulated as a
toxic substance by the EPA
and has to be disposed
of as hazardous waste.
Does that make sense to you?
Is that a problem?
Well, I think so,
considering mercury
is the most toxic
non-radioactive substance known
to humans.
>> After Dr. Mark Hyman's visit,
I started thinking about health
and wellness in a whole new
way, specifically the chemicals
and elements we extract
from the environment and put
into our bodies.
Get it out.
The first step in
my wellness program
was to remove those silver
dental fillings, or mercury,
out of my mouth.
>> This is sucking
in all the vapors.
[MUSIC - LENNY KRAVITZ, "ONCE
YOU DIG IN"]
(SINGING) Once
you dig in, you'll
find it coming out
the other side.
And once you dig
in, once you dig in.
>> What a relief to get the
mercury out of my mouth.
Now, to move on to the obvious--
what am I putting into my mouth?
Continuing my
education, I sought out
Deborah Garcia, a pioneer
of the organic food movement
and the wife of the Grateful
Dead singer Jerry Garcia.
>> There's two
competing food systems.
There's agriculture, and
there's agribusiness.
You know, there's
the corporate one
that's completely
anonymous and synthetic.
And it can be on the shelf
for, God knows, years.
That's basically fake.
I learned about genetic
engineering, which
I didn't know anything about.
I was so outraged because
it had gone under the radar.
They break apart DNA, and
then they recombine it.
And then we combine it with DNA
that's from another species.
So they put bacteria in wheat,
or they put a human's genes
in fish.
It's a cell invasion technology.
We actually change the
very nature of the cell.
What they've learned since
they started bringing out
genetically engineered
crops is one gene
does not create just one trait.
It can create all
kinds of traits,
depending on its
own environment.
>> I started to
change my lifestyle.
First, I remove GMOs,
Genetically Modified Organisms,
and industrialized
foods from my diet.
Second, I learned
that rainforest plants
may serve as natural
remedies for the body.
Can the plants be
our true medicine?
>> This is a great
environment here.
And a lot of people just
come to this greenhouse
during the day to hang out
and get a little peace.
[MUSIC - STING, "FIELDS OF
GOLD"]
(SINGING) When the
West Wind moves upon--
>> A medicine is, in
theory, something that helps
to promote, restore, maintain
health and balance within us.
Plants are the largest
category of medicines
in use in the world.
The plants call to us.
I do work a lot
with cacao, which
is the tree that yields the
pods that contain cocoa beans.
And cocoa beans are
used to make chocolate,
our favorite convection.
Cacao, as it turns
out, is probably
the ultimate superfood.
The agents in cocoa
beans turn out
to be profoundly
beneficial for the heart.
They're very beneficial to mind.
They brighten up mood.
They enhance brain function.
(SINGING) We'll walk
in fields of gold.
>> Acai comes from
the Brazilian Amazon.
(SINGING) We'll walk
in fields of gold.
>> And those purple pigments
are insanely beneficial for us--
extremely beneficial
to the immune system.
IT has anti-inflammatory
properties.
The antioxidant activity is very
high, so it protects our cells
and keeps us healthier
and youthful.
That's an example of a
real high-value fruit.
[MUSIC - OWL CITY, "FIREFLIES"]
>> Antioxidants, plants,
superfoods, organic?
>> Hippocrates said, "Let
your food be your medicine."
You have to have pure food
for that to be possible.
Quality of food matters.
Anything we put into our
bodies affects our biology.
>> Those are good.
These are really important--
good old-fashioned blueberries.
>> Certified organic foods
are still going to have some
environmental toxins in
them because everything has
environmental toxins.
But they won't have those
toxins applied to them.
>> Our society is soil-blind.
They take the soil for granted.
They think it's inert You know?
It's just this brown stuff down
there, which they call dirt.
But soil is alive.
You know, soil is a system.
It's an ecosystem.
There's billions of different
kinds of organisms in it.
They have relationships
with each other.
The plants have a
relationship with the soil.
The roots have a relationship
with the fungi in soil
that have a relationship
with the rocks that
bring the nutrients
to the fungi that
bring it to the plant,
which then we get to eat.
>> It's perfect.
Good old fresh spinach.
Look at this-- nice
organic green spinach.
>> It's quite simple, actually.
You take away the bad stuff.
You put in the good stuff.
The body knows what to do.
(SINGING) You would
not believe your eyes
if 10 million fireflies lit
up the world as I fell asleep.
>> Ah, the superfoods.
>> 'Cuz they fill the open air
and leave teardrops everywhere.
You'd think me rude, but I
would just stand and stare.
I'd like to make myself believe
that planet Earth turns slowly.
It's hard to say that
I'd rather stay awake
when I'm asleep because
my dreams are bursting
at the seams.
[ALARM CLOCK RINGING]
>> Britta, you
better turn that off.
It was a whole new experience
incorporating superfoods
into my diet,
especially my breakfast.
It was amazing to see my body
and well-being transform over
time.
[MUSIC - THE NEW RADICALS, "YOU
GET WHAT YOU GIVE"]
>> Thanks for the shake.
>> I love you so much.
>> Yeah.
>> Bye-bye.
>> See you later.
>> All right, honey.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Two one, two, three, ow!
(SINGING) Wake up kids, we've
got the dreamers' disease.
Age 14, we got you
down on your knees.
So polite, we're busy
still saying please.
Frienemies, who when you're
down ain't your friends,
every night we smash
their Mercedes-Benz.
First, we run, and then
we laugh 'til we cry.
But when the night is falling,
you cannot find the light.
>> Bye, honey.
>> Have a good day.
>> You, too.
(SINGING) Cannot find the light.
>> I was on the path to personal
health and consciousness.
Change, I learned,
starts within.
But how does our health
relate to global awareness
and our big blue planet?
(SINGING) Don't let go,
you've got the music--
>> We are one climate.
We are one ecosystem.
We are one economy.
Sooner or later,
we have to realize
that we are one humanity.
>> I'm actually not convinced
that there is a wake-up call
that's going to suddenly make
people go, oh, my goodness.
We have to change.
[OMINOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It might not seem like
a lot when you say, OK,
half a percent of forests
are lost globally.
1/10 of 1% annually
gets deforested.
[CHAIN SAW BUZZING]
>> Forests, trees, CO2--
what does this mean?
>> That 1/10 of 1% of
deforestation annually
contributes 15% to greenhouse
gas emissions globally.
So it's staggering-- small
number, huge impacts.
[OMINOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
Forests have such
an important role
in terms of storing carbon.
>> Back when I was planting
trees in UMass Amherst,
I read Al Gore's book
"Earth in Balance."
It changed my life.
But now that the Earth
gave me back my health,
his message resonated even more.
>> We face a global emergency,
a deepening climate crisis that
requires us to act.
>> We have a material
problem which is carbon.
Carbon, which gives us life--
I mean, we are carbon ourselves.
But what we realize is that
we have carbon, a material,
in the wrong place,
the atmosphere.
43% of the anthropogenic
carbon, that
produced by humans since
1850, is now in the oceans.
It's essentially carbonic acid.
By end of century, coral reefs
will dissolve to the point
that we expect that we will lose
the bottom of the food chain.
>> If you've got something so
devastating imminently upon us,
what would Winston Churchill do?
Well, he would start a war room.
What you do is you bring in the
smartest people you can find,
and you actually have them
input all of their information
into a central place.
>> I think you need to
make it real to people.
I think right now, as they
say in Britain, we've almost
got our knickers in a twist
by using the words carbon,
using the words climate change,
when the real root cause
is that we are depleting
our natural resources
at an incredible swift pace.
>> How can you protect
something that has no borders?
We have to understand that this
planet is a singular model.
It's not land and sea.
It's not two different
planets, here.
This is one planet.
It's the circulatory
system of life.
>> So the temperature is rising.
And that brings all
sorts of changes.
The higher the temperature,
the more evaporation there is.
Because of the more
rapid evaporation,
you get more moisture
in the atmosphere.
So you get more
storms because you
have more energy in the system.
A heat wave in Russia went
on for weeks and weeks.
It started in late
June, went through July,
and by early August, there were
300 or 400 new fires starting
every day in Western Russia.
I mean, totally out
of control-- they
couldn't begin to
think about it.
>> The planet will not
tolerate this kind of violence.
The rage of Gaia will come
back with great vengeance.
[FIRE CRACKLING]
>> I don't think we've yet begun
to grasp what it is we're doing
and what the
consequences will be.
[CLOCKS CHIMING]
>> Do we ever think how one
storm, one tree falling,
or one coral reef dying
affects our living planet?
What's it going to take
to finally wake us up?
>> Paradigm shifts do
not happen overnight.
And yet, they seem
to happen over night.
Shifts in collective
consciousness
take a long time
to ripen, but when
they reach a critical mass, then
suddenly the shift is there.
>> The light bulb
finally turned on.
Everything I'd learned
in the past few years
was all making sense.
That crazy idea that
I had 30 years ago--
planting trees and
saving the world--
it didn't seem so
far-fetched anymore.
What is our connection
to the trees?
>> Speaking of trees, we think
tree is not a part of our body.
It's not a part of us.
Can you separate
yourself from this tree?
If the tree exists, you exist.
If it perishes, you perish.
These lungs are mine
because they supply oxygen
to all parts of my body.
And therefore, you care for it.
Where did the lungs
get its oxygen from?
From the trees that surround us.
Then is it not true that the
tree, too, is an extended part
of the body?
It's just another organ.
It's just that it's not
sitting inside this body.
Truly caring for
yourself means caring
for the world that surrounds
you, caring for this tree,
caring for this planet.
>> We imagine ourselves
to be separate.
We suffer from what Einstein
called "the optical delusion
of consciousness,"
that we're individuals,
and we're not connected
to the whole of nature.
>> If we come from the forests,
and we are interconnected,
then what's our higher purpose?
>> Relationship between humans
and living systems and so forth
is we're coming to this
extraordinary point of crisis.
And this point of crisis
is underlined and encircled
by this kind of growing
human awareness.
This is this
strange way in which
the world is organizing itself.
Now, it's not just
transnational.
It's transcultural.
It's almost beyond
time in some way.
Something was arising.
There's something
deeper happening here.
I feel like what we're seeing
is humanity's immune response.
There is something
happening in civilization
that was like a living system--
that we were collectively
manifesting an intelligence
that life creates the conditions
that are conducive to life.
That's what we're
all here to do.
[SOFT MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We share our DNA with trees.
The tree mimics the human body
as feet and a trunk and limbs.
It bears fruit.
It has seeds.
>> Whoever imagined the link
between the DNA of a tree
and ourselves?
What is nature
trying to teach us?
>> When I think about roots,
I also think about the plant
itself--
its desire to create
seeds, to propagate.
Those seeds are the future.
And those seeds carry a little
bit of a different twist
genetically then the roots
and plants it came from.
And they allow for change
because nature is about change.
>> That's the wonderful
thing about nature.
It's always balanced.
There's no such
thing as imbalance.
>> Well, the biggest thing that
nature is teaching us is that
nature gives back.
If you look at a forest, the
forest is a perfect ecosystem.
The nutrients go up into
the tree, into the leaves.
The leaves fall off,
down to the ground.
And they are broken
down by microorganisms.
And they go back into the
soil, and they feed the tree.
[SOFT MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The idea is the
world gets better.
That is designed.
We look for a
condition of support,
where one species
supports another species.
Everything is in symbiosis
and synaptic space.
And the idea is that things
get better and more fecund
and richer.
>> God, I love trees.
>> How many human buildings
have made oxygen lately?
>> Don't we all love trees?
>> Nature is an incredibly
sophisticated center.
>> Gandhi once said,
"Non-violence is the greatest
force at the
disposal of mankind.
It is mightier than
the mightiest weapon
of destruction devised
by the ingenuity of man."
What was the wisdom
behind this peace icon?
>> Nature follows the
path of least resistance.
This is the non-violent path
that Gandhi and Martin Luther
King and so many
extraordinary people
have tried to counsel us with
in terms of how we address power
and how we change
the relationship
between human beings and
concentrations of power.
>> If peace is a
state of existence,
then we certainly can get there.
All we have to do is
look at the example
that Costa Rica has set.
[ENERGETIC MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Natural capital was
the form of capital that
wasn't on the balance
sheet of the world.
That is, the air, water
resources, soil, forests,
the animals, biodiversity--
that's the natural capital.
>> I headed down to Costa Rica
to see firsthand this idea
of natural capitalism.
I was curious.
How does the government sustain
economic and political balance
with its people and
the environment?
>> One of the challenges that
we face today is our so far
inability to deal with what
we call the global commons.
We thought that water,
air, natural materials
were limitless.
And moving towards
sustainable development
was, of course, living
in harmony and peace
with our environment and looking
at nature as an opportunity,
and not as a cost.
The constitutional
abolishment of the army
allowed us to generate
what I would call a peace
dividend, where over the years,
we very successfully invested
in health, in education, in
well-being, in infrastructure,
in everything that makes people
live better within a society.
Costa Rica has 5% of the
world's total biodiversity.
Initial stages in this
direction were very much
taken out of a
respectful commitment
to doing our share in terms
of preserving these habitats.
As we increased national
parks and wildlife reserves,
we also began to
see them as centers
of attraction for ecotourism.
>> Whoever imagined that a
peace dividend is derived from
nature?
That by allowing the
biodiversity to thrive,
it also serves as a
mirror for own well-being?
[INSPIRATIONAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We moved tremendously in
terms of proactive legislation.
One of those pieces
was a carbon tax.
The proceeds from the
tax now had the resources
to be able to go out
and buy in the market
environmental services.
Small farmers that
had been growing rice
were now moving
into planting trees.
>> It's like a baseball game.
It's like it's the
seventh inning,
and we're down by two runs.
But we haven't lost yet.
We've still got time
to turn it around.
>> It was time to get rooted--
to connect the
dots with humanity.
[MUSIC - COLDPLAY, "YELLOW"]
I wondered what our
forefathers thought when
creating our great nation--
a nation born from
the ashes of war.
It was time to look back
and take a step forward
to see what were these
original peacemakers thinking?
>> If I gave you
16 days and said,
you figure out what are the
fundamentals of human rights
and come back and tell
me those three things,
what would they be?
>> "We hold these truths to be
self-evident that all men are
created equal, that they are
endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable rights.
That among them, these
are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness."
>> I think Thomas Jefferson
spent a lot of time thinking
about that.
His conclusion was to be a
living thing, you have to have,
one, growth.
(SINGING) And it
was called yellow.
>> We have nine billion people?
OK, let's design all our systems
to work with those nine billion
because the ants have like
20, 30 times our body mass.
They're not
destroying the planet.
Two-- liberty.
(SINGING) Your skin--
>> You have to have
free form of energy.
You have to have income to grow.
Where does that come from?
Sun.
(SINGING) Something beautiful.
Tonight, you know I love you so.
>> And then third,
pursuit of happiness.
>> We say that if you
want peace in the world,
you have to become
peace to make peace.
So we tried to root out the
roots of violence and anger
in our heart.
But there is no way to peace.
Peace itself is the way.
>> Standing over Gandhi's
ashes reminded me of my journey
and my commitment to
mankind's finding peace.
For all of us to be the change
we want to see in the world,
perhaps it's the
simple things in life
that bring forth
out greatest peace.
>> If you are really
looking for a breakthrough,
you must inquire into yourself.
You must examine the condition
that caused that conflict.
You must examine the conditions
that cause the trauma in you.
And then go into the root
of the conflict itself,
then you'll have a breakthrough.
If the world must transform,
individual must transform.
You are the world.
You cannot separate
yourself from the world.
Individual transformation
is global transformation.
>> Consciousness--
it's like when a river,
when a very powerful river,
lands in the ocean and loses
his name and becomes the ocean.
When you realize
actually, we are all one
in different karmic bodies,
with different purposes,
that's consciousness.
That's enlightenment.
>> Hey, Greg.
>> Hey, Jim.
How are you?
>> Good to see you.
>> What's going on?
There was still one more
seed I needed to plant.
I wasn't expecting my
nephew to understand
the meaning of the peace
tree, but I thought
I would give it a chance.
I've been thinking
about you lately,
and I brought you a gift.
>> Oh, really?
What is it?
>> I brought you a bonsai tree.
>> Cool.
[MUSIC - KEATON SIMONS, "LET'S
MOVE THE WORLD"]
>> My nephew Gabe and
I talked for hours.
He had lots of questions about
trees and the meaning of peace.
I didn't have all the
answers for him, nor myself.
But I thought a
good place to start
would be Strawberry Fields.
(SINGING) Let's move the
world to a better place,
with air we can breathe,
clean water, and space--
a world without war,
a world without hate.
Let's move the world
to a better place.
>> The most important thing
is to absolutely believe that
peace is possible and to be
convinced that violence is not
going to get us there.
>> Everything had
come full circle.
I was elated to be invited
back to the United Nations
to participate at the
International Day of Peace.
(SINGING) Let's make the
world a much better place.
>> We can be human
only together.
We can be safe only together.
We can be prosperous only--
hey-- together!
Together, together, together.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC - K'NAAN, "WAVIN' FLAG"]
>> There needs to be one
day, a universal day ,
that is all people,
all around the world,
just focused on peace.
And if we can just have
that experience for one day,
that will be enough
that we will know what
it is that is our real purpose.
(SINGING) Poor people
zone, but it's my home,
all I have known, where I got
grown, streets we would roam.
Out of the darkness, I came the
farthest, among the hardest--
[BELL TOLLING]
(SINGING) Learn
from these streets.
>> Compassion is a feeling
of love that comes within.
It can be created by disasters,
by traumas, by sicknesses.
When somebody melts, as
the ego melts, and we
want to do something, you turn
into a compassionate being.
Enlightened beings will
want to help other beings.
And that is called compassion.
(SINGING) And then it goes
back and then it goes back,
and then it goes back, whoa.
So many wars, settling scores.
>> Years ago, I woke up
traumatized by violence.
The answer that came to me
then was to plant trees--
to get back to the roots
of nature and peace.
What I didn't understand back
then was that I am the tree.
We are all the trees--
that each one of us
can make a difference.
As Gandhi said, "Be the change
you want to see in the world."
We all need to
replant our roots,
and we join the global
interconnected root
system of life.
>> Come on, everybody
put your hand in.
>> By becoming one
with the world,
we become one with each other.
(SINGING) --not far
away, but for now we say,
when I get older,
I will be stronger.
They'll call me freedom,
just like a wavin' flag.
And then it goes back,
and then it goes back,
and then it goes back, oh, and
then it goes, and then it goes.
[K'NAAN VOCALIZING]
And everybody will
be singing it.
And you and I will
And we all will be singing it.
Whoa-oh, whoa-oh, whoa-oh.
When I get older,
I will be stronger.
They'll call me freedom,
just like a wavin' flag.
And then it goes back,
and then it goes back,
and then it goes back.
When I get older,
I will be stronger.
They'll call me freedom,
just like a wavin' flag.
And then it goes back,
and then it goes back,
and then it goes back, whoa-oh.
When I get older,
when I get older,
I will be stronger,
just like a wavin' flag,
just like a wavin' flag, just
like a wavin' flag, flag, flag,
just like a wavin' flag.
[MUSIC - JOHN LENNON, "LOVE"]
(SINGING) Love is real.
Real is love.
Love is feeling, feeling love.
Love is wanting to be loved.
Love is touch.
Touch is love.
Love is reaching, reaching love.
Love is asking to be loved.
Love is you, you and me.
Love is knowing we can be.
Love is free.
Free is love.
Love is living, living love.
Love is needing to be loved.
[UPBEAT ORCHESTRAL MUSIC
PLAYING]